
### Abstract

Innovative  evidence  modalities-such  as  OMICS-guided  clinical  trials, causally  interpretable  meta-analyses  (CMAs),  and  real-world  evidence (RWE)-are  increasingly  recognized  by  leading  professional  organisations  and  regulatory  authorities.  A  PubMed  review  revealed  gaps  in integrating  these  modalities  into  the  current  evidence  hierarchies, underscoring  the  urgent  need  for  a  next-generation  hierarchy  that recognises modern science and regulatory standards.

To address this, a new A+ level of evidence is added to the traditional A, B, C hierarchy. Level A+ includes three or more OMICS-guided clinical trials, RCTs, and RWE, supported by multiple secondary evidence reports such as CMAs and/or Systematic Reviews (SRs). Level A includes fewer of these studies ± CMAs and SRs. Level B includes prospective or retrospective studies not meeting the above criteria. Level C includes case reports, laboratory  data,  expert  opinion,  and  contested  studies.  Each  level  is further subdivided into four tiers based on the number and type of clinical reports and the number of secondary evidence available (see text for details).

Utilisation  of  this  next-generation  hierarchy  in  clinical  practice  is expected  to  streamline  the  integration  of  novel  evidence  into  decision-making  and  facilitate  a  transparent  transition  from  evidence  to guideline recommendations.

### Background

Clinical decision-making and policy formulation, encompassing  preventive  strategies,  diagnostic  procedures, medical treatments, percutaneous interventions, and  surgical  procedures,  rely  primarily  on  evidence derived from scientific research.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">1-3</sup> Today, these scientific reports are subjected to ranking into A, B, and C levels of evidence. The concept first introduced by the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination in 1979, further refined by David Sackett, the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based  Medicine  (OCEBM),  and  others.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">4-8</sup>  The current hierarchy ranks prospective randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and any type of systematic reviews (with or without  meta-analysis)  at  the  highest  level,  followed, sequentially,  by  non-randomized  clinical  trials,  cohortstudies, case series, case reports, experimental laboratory data, and expert opinions.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">4-6</sup>

Emerging evidence types, including large-scale studies using genomics, proteomics, metabolomics (OMICS)-guided clinical trials, causally interpretable meta-analyses, and real-world evidence (RWE), are increasingly recognized by leading regulatory agencies including the FDA and EMA.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">9,10</sup> These advances expose limitations  in  the  traditional  evidence  hierarchy,  highlighting the need for an updated framework in biomedical research and evidence-based medicine.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">11,13</sup>

### Methods and results:

We  conducted  a  comprehensive  literature  search  in PubMed, following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, to identify studies addressing evidence hierarchies that incorporate OMICS-guided trials, propensity-matched real-world evidence, and causal meta-analyses. From 529 titles identified within the last 10 years, 67 article abstracts were reviewed, 26 full texts read by the first two authors. None of the 26 articles included all the innovative evidence modalities mentioned above into a hierarchy of evidence. Four articles called for a revision of the current hierarchy: two focused primarily on artificial intelligence (AI)-guided analysis of evidence and its role in evidence-based medicine;<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">14,15</sup> one article incorporated causal meta-analysis alone;<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">8</sup> and the fourth removed the rigid divisions within the current evidence pyramid and proposed ranking various studies using wavy boundaries.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">7</sup> These findings call for a novel hierarchy that should address these limitations.

### The Next Generation Hierarchy

The ideal next generation hierarchy of evidence should:

1. Employ clear, intuitive, and accessible classification systems  tailored  for  diverse  stakeholders  including clinicians, researchers, policymakers, and patients.
2. Distinguish between multiple (three or more) consistent publications from limited (less than three)  reports  within  each  evidence  category  to reflect the weight of corroborated evidence.
3. Recognize  OMICS-guided  tools  and  clinical  trials that  have  received  validation  and  approval  from regulatory  authorities,  emphasizing  their  growing importance.
4. Recognize propensity-matched real-world evidence (pm-RWE) that have received validation and approval from regulatory authorities, to enhance inferential reliability.
5. Recognize causal meta-analyses as a distinct category, acknowledging their superior capacity for causal inference compared to conventional meta-analyses.
6. Align consistently with GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation)  framework,  thereby  facilitating  the  transition from evidence to clinical practice guideline development.
7. Clearly  differentiate  randomized  controlled  trials (RCTs) from non-randomized controlled (non-RCTs) studies, and  further  categorize  prospective  and retrospective studies.
8. Recognize  systematic  reviews  (SRs)  adhering  to established  standards  (e.g.,  PRISMA  guidelines)  as separate  and  more  rigorous  entities  compared  to non-standardized  reviews,  perspectives  and  view points.
9. Distinguish OMICS-guided case reports from traditional case reports, given the robust evidence  these OMICS - guided reports provide.
10. Recognize OMICS-guided laboratory findings, AI-assisted  laboratory  data  and  computational  modelling, as well as other expert opinions.
11. Maintain flexibility to accommodate evolving combinations of the above criteria as scientific methods and data sources continue to evolve.
12. Be amenable to automation and integration within electronic health record systems to streamline evidence application in clinical practice.
13. Support dynamic and continuous updating capabilities to incorporate emerging scientific evidence efficiently and in real time.
14. Respect the relative value ascribed to existing evidence types, to cause the least distortion to the understanding of clinical guidelines previously draft ed existing hierarchy of evidence.
15. Differentiate between primary evidence (clinical studies) and secondary evidence (CMAs and SRs).

Therefore,  we  propose  a  Next  Generation  Hierarchy  of Evidence  that  incorporates  a  new  'A+  level'  and  redefined  A,  B,  and  C  levels  of  evidence,  as  presented  in Figure 1.

Figure  1:  Next  Generation  Hierarchy  of  Evidence  in  Medicine, depicting the four primary levels of evidence:

Level A+ including multiple (3 or more) OMICS-guided clinical trials, multiple RCTs and multiple real-world evidence that are supported  by  more  than  one  CMAs  and  three  or  more systematic reviews.

Level A including one or more OMICS-guided clinical trials, one or more RCTs and one or more real-world evidence that may or may not be supported by secondary evidence, including CMAs and systematic reviews.

Level  B  includes  non-OMICS-guided  clinical  trials,  non-RCT, non-RWE, prospective and retrospective studies.

Level C includes case reports, expert opinions, lab data etc.

(r-OMICS  =  recognized  OMICS-guided  clinical  trials;  RCTs  = randomized controlled trials; RWE = real-world evidence; CMA = causal  meta-analysis;  SRs  =  systematic  reviews;  non-RCT  = non-randomized controlled trials/studies).

The four primary levels of evidence are further subdivided  into  four  sub-levels  each,  resulting  in  a  total  of  16 distinct sublevels of evidence. To clarify the rank of every piece of evidence, these 16 levels are displayed in Table 1.

Table 1: Next Generation Hierarchy of Evidence in Medicine

| 1⁰ Levels   | 2⁰ Levels and Type of Evidence   | 2⁰ Levels and Type of Evidence                                                                                                                                                                          | 2⁰ Levels and Type of Evidence   | 2⁰ Levels and Type of Evidence                                                                                                                                                                               |
|-------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A+          | A I+                             | Recognized OMICS clinical trials* a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                  | A II+                            | Other OMICs and/or RCTs a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                                 |
| A+          | A III+                           | Recognized PM-RWE** a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                                | A IV+                            | Other RWE a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic review (with or without meta-analyses)                                                                                |
| A           | A I                              | Recognized OMICS clinical trials* a. ≥ 1 publications and b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                  | A II                             | Other OMICs and/or RCTs a. ≥ 1 publications and b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                                 |
| A           | A III                            | Recognized PM-RWE** a. ≥ 1 publications and b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                                | A IV                             | Other RWE a. ≥ 1 publications and/or b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without related meta-analyses)                                                                    |
| B           | B I                              | Non-OMICS, Non-RCTs, Non-RWE Prospective Studies a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                   | B II                             | Non-OMICS, Non-RWE Retrospective Studies a. ≥ 3 publications and b. > 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. ≥ 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                |
| B           | B III                            | Non-OMICS, Non-RCTs, Non-RWE Prospective Studies a. ≥ 1 publications and b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                   | B IV                             | Non-OMICS, Non-RWE Retrospective Studies a. ≥ 1 publications and b. ≤ 1 causal meta-analyses and/or c. < 3 systematic reviews (with or without meta-analyses)                                                |
| C           | C I                              | ≥ 3 OMICS-guided case reports                                                                                                                                                                           | C II                             | ≥ 3 Non-OMICS-guided case reports                                                                                                                                                                            |
| C           | C III                            | a. 1-2 OMICS-guided case reports b. OMICS laboratory reports c. AI- assisted computer modelling d. ≥ 3 survey-based studies. e. non-systematic reviews and Perspectives f. ≥ 3 controversial studies*** | C IV                             | a. 1-2 non-OMICS guided case reports b. non-OMICS laboratory reports c. non-AI-assisted computer modelling d. 1-2 survey-based studies e. Viewpoints, and other expert opinions f. 1-2 controversial studies |

(*) OMICS-guided clinical trials that are recognized by regulatory authorities.

(**) Propensity-matched real-world evidence that is recognized by regulatory authorities.

(***) Studies with multiple (three or more) opposing studies and/or statements voiced by professional organizations.

### Discussion

The next-generation hierarchy of evidence places OMICS-guided clinical trials, recognized by established regulatory authorities, above traditional  non-OMICS randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Despite the substantial difference between the number of patients typically enrolled in RCTs and those included in RWE studies, we propose retaining RCTs above propensity-matched RWE-even when the latter was recognized by regulatory bodies.  This  approach  reflects  the  understanding  that, regardless  of  large  sample  sizes  and/or  the  use  of propensity  score  matching  in  RWE  reports,  it  may  not provide the balance of both known and unknown prognostic factors offered by randomization, as highlighted by Agoritsas et al.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">16</sup>

The next-generation hierarchy assigns greater weight to  types  of  evidence  based  on  three  or  more  studies versus those based on only one or two. It also designates causal meta-analyses as higher-level secondary evidence than  conventional  (association-based)  meta-analyses, prioritizing demonstrated causality over simple correlation.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">17,18</sup>  Confidence  in  the  evidence  can  be  adjusted according to the frequency with which results are replicated and by the presence or resurgence of contradictory findings.

This logic is supported by:

1. FDA  Approvals  Without  RCTs:  The  FDA  has  more recently approved numerous anticancer drugs based on surrogate endpoints like progression-free survival and response rate-often in the absence of RCT  data.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">19</sup> This  approach  has  become  especially prevalent  with  targeted  and  precision  therapies, where a traditional RCT may be impractical.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">19-21</sup>  The FDA  has  also  approved  drugs  based  on  responses observed  in  retrospective  real-world  omics-guided studies. More recent approvals have followed positive  response  rates  from  non-RCTs  leveraging real-world data (RWD) and OMICS-guided data.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">21,22</sup>
2. Compelling Academic Support for RWE  and OMICS-Guided  Trials  Validity:  Leading  researchers showed that RWE and omics-guided trials can offer faster,  more  personalized,  and  sometimes  more accurate evidence of efficacy. <sup style="color:#44A6B2;">1,23,24</sup> "Home-run" trials for  rare  cancers  demonstrate  that  using  matched genomics  and  real-world  clinical  settings  enables rapid evaluation of therapies, increases trial accessibility, and can yield robust evidence for select populations.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">1,23,24</sup>
3. Causal  Meta-Analysis  and  Inference:  There  is  a growing  consensus  that  causal  inference  methods and causal meta-analysis provide a rigorous framework  for  synthesizing  evidence  across  a  variety  of sources-by focusing on well-defined causal effects in real-world populations. This  addresses  many limitations of traditional meta-analyses and enables clearer policy and practice recommendations, especially in complex or heterogeneous clinical areas.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">17,18</sup> Modern clinical guidelines are increasingly adopting causal language and explicit causal inference frameworks  to  bridge  the  gap  between  study  data  and actionable, patient-centred recommendations.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">18</sup>

Furthermore, the four primary levels of the proposed hierarchy  facilitate  the  progression  from  evidence  to recommendations in alignment with the GRADE framework, that serves as the cornerstone of clinical practice guideline development.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;">25,26</sup> However, the new hierarchy does not explicitly address certain domains such as risk of  bias,  directness  of  evidence,  and  publication  bias, which are best evaluated within the structured GRADE system.  While  both  approaches  share  similar  foundational principles, GRADE involves a thorough assessment of evidence quality by expert panels, over extended time periods, and is specifically designed for guideline development.<sup style="color:#44A6B2;"></sup> Moreover, the next generation hierarchy complements GRADE by integrating novel data sources and advanced analytical techniques, making it more adaptable for practical, everyday clinical decision-making.

The subdivision of the four primary levels of evidence into  a  total  of  16  distinct  strata  greatly  enhances  the precision and granularity of the clinical research hierarchy. This system recognizes established evidence types, such as RCTs and meta-analyses, while also accounting for critical factors-including the number of supporting studies  using  innovative  evidence  modalities,  links  to secondary  evidence  such  as  causal  meta-analyses,  as well  as  systematic  reviews,  reproducibility  within  three years, AI support, and expert opinion.

It  also  takes into account if the published data was contradicted by other more recent reports and/or statements issued by professional organizations. By capturing these nuanced distinctions, it moves beyond traditional broad categories to reflect subtle variations in evidence strength. As a result, guideline developers, clinicians, and policymakers  can  more  clearly  assimilate  the  specific studies and data underpinning each recommendation.

### Conclusion

This  redefined  hierarchy  keeps  pace  with  the  rapidly evolving landscape of biomedical research. By integrating OMICS-guided studies and laboratory reports, RWE, and causally interpretable meta-analyses it represents a transformative  shift  in  how  evidence  is  evaluated  and translated  into  clinical  practice  guidelines.  The  next generation hierarchy may enable guideline developers, clinicians, and policymakers to clearly identify the rationale behind recommendations, specifying exactly which study types and datasets underpin each level of practice guideline recommendations.

###### Declarations of Interest

Reida M. El Oakley and Carlos A. Mestres are Co-Editors-in-Chief of the Journal of the Best Available Evidence in Medicine. Khairya K. Elmuttardi is  Managing  Editor.  Adel  Altawaty,  Adel  El  Taguri,  Riyad  Bendardaf, Salvatore Lentini, Jérôme Cau, Murad Ghrew, Tarek Momenah, Abdelsalam Almatmed, and Mario Petrou serve on the editorial board.

###### References

1. Adashek JJ, Kurzrock R. Balancing clinical evidence in the context of a pandemic. Nat Biotechnol [Internet]. 2021 Mar 1;39(3):270-4. doi: 10.1038/s41587-021-00834-6
2. Guyatt G, Schandelmaier S, Brignardello-Petersen R, De Beer H, Prasad M, Murad MH, et al. Core GRADE 3: rating certainty of evidence-assessing inconsistency. BMJ [Internet]. 2025;389. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2024-081905
3. Cunha-Oliveira T, Ioannidis JPA, Oliveira PJ. BEST PRACTICES FOR DATA MANAGEMENT AND SHARING IN EXPERIMENTAL BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH. Physiol Rev [Internet]. 2024 Jul 1;104(3):1387-408. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00043.2023
4. The periodic health examination. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination. Can Med Assoc J [Internet].

5. Sackett DL. Rules of evidence and clinical recommendations on the use of antithrombotic agents. Chest [Internet]. 1989 Feb 1;95(2 SUPPL.):2S-4S.
6. Explanation of the 2011 OCEBM Levels of Evidence Centre for  Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM), University of Oxford [Internet].
7. Murad MH, Asi N, Alsawas M, Alahdab F. New evidence pyramid. BMJ Evid Based Med [Internet]. 2016 Aug 1;21(4):125-7. doi: 10.1136/ebmed-2016-110401
8. Jamshidi S, Pati D. Hierarchy of Evidence: An Appraisal Tool for Weighting the Evidence in Healthcare Design Research Based on Internal Validity. HERD [Internet]. 2023 Jul 1;16(3):19-38. doi: 10.1177/19375867231175916
9. ElZarrad MK, Corrigan-Curay J. The US Food and Drug Administr tion's Real-World Evidence Framework: A Commitment for Engagement and Transparency on Real-World Evidence. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Jul 1;106(1):33-5. doi: 10.1002/cpt.1389
10.   Medicines Agency E. EMA Regulatory Science to 2025 Strategic reflection. 2025;
11. Williams DM, Evans M. The evolution of real-world evidence in healthcare decision making. Expert Opin Drug Saf [Internet]. 2023. Jun 3;22(6):443-5. doi: 10.1080/14740338.2023.2224559
12. Vatkar A, Kale S, Shyam A, Srivastava S. Understanding the Levels of Evidence in Medical Research. J Orthop Case Rep [Internet]. 2025;15(5):6. doi: 10.13107/jocr.2025.v15.i05.5534
13.   The Pyramid Schema: The Origins and Impact of Evidence Pyramids - CJ Blunt [Internet]. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.16118.88643
14. Nowak AJ. Artificial Intelligence in Evidence-Based Medicine. Artif Intell Med [Internet]. 2021;1-12. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58080-3\_43-1
15. Bellini V, Ori E, Coccolini F, Bignami E. Evidence pyramid and artificial intelligence: a metamorphosis of clinical research. Discover Health Systems 2023 2:1 [Internet]. 2023 Nov 21;2(1):1-6. doi: 10.1007/s44250-023-00050-w
16.   Agoritsas T, Merglen A, Shah ND, O'Donnell M, Guyatt GH. Adjusted Analyses in Studies Addressing Therapy and Harm: Users' Guides to the Medical Literature. JAMA [Internet]. 2017 Feb 21;317(7):748-59. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.20029
17. Berenfeld C, Boughdiri A, Colnet B, van Amsterdam WAC, Bellet A, Khellaf R, et al. Causal Meta-Analysis: Rethinking the Foundations of Evidence-Based Medicine. 2025 May 26; doi: 10.48550/ariv.2505.20168
18.   Wang K, Wei C, Labrecque JA. Causal language jumps in clinical practice guidelines for diabetes management. 2025 Mar 5; doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.03557
19.   Tsimberidou AM, Braiteh F, Stewart DJ, Kurzrock R. Ultimate Fate of Oncology Drugs Approved by the US Food and Drug Administration Without a Randomized Trial. Journal of Clinical Oncology [Internet]. 2009 Dec 20;27(36):6243-50. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.6018
20.   Wedam SB, Beaver JA, Amiri-Kordestani L, Bloomquist E, Tang S, Goldberg KB, et al. US Food and Drug Administration Pooled Analysis to Assess the Impact of Bone-Only Metastatic Breast Cancer on Clinical Trial Outcomes and Radiographic Assessments. J Clin Oncol [Internet]. 2018 Apr 20;36(12):1225-31. doi: 10.1200CO.2017.74.6917
21. Wedam S, Fashoyin-Aje L, Bloomquist E, Tang S, Sridhara R, Goldberg KB, et al. FDA Approval Summary: Palbociclib for Male Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer. Clin Cancer Res [Internet]. 2020 Mar 15;26(6):1208-12. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-19-2580
22.   Marcus L, Lemery SJ, Keegan P, Pazdur R. FDA Approval Summary: Pembrolizumab for the Treatment of Microsatellite Instability-High Solid Tumors. Clin Cancer Res [Internet]. 2019;25(13):3753-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-4070
23.   Subbiah V. The next generation of evidence-based medicine. Nat Med [Internet]. 2023 Jan 1;29(1):49-58. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-02160-z
24. Adashek JJ, Kurzrock R. Home-run trials for rare cancers: giving the right drug(s) to the right patients at the right time and in the right place. NPJ Precis Oncol [Internet]. 2023 Dec 1;7(1):1-6. doi: 10.1038/s41698-023-00487-5
25. Granholm A, Al Duhailib Z, Alhazzani W, Oczkowski S, Belley-Cote E, Møller MH. GRADE pearls and pitfalls-Part 2: Clinical practice guidelines. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand [Internet]. 2024 May 1 [cited 2025 Oct 8];68(5):593-600. Available from: doi: 10.1111/aas.14384
26. Sen CK. A Framework for Writing and Critically Evaluating Guideline Articles. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle) [Internet]. 2025 Jul 1;14(7):323-6.  doi: 10.1089/wound.2025.0083